HSEARCH-4601 Syntactic sugar for OR/AND predicates (#3152)
hibernate/hibernate-search: documentation/src/main/asciidoc/reference/search-dsl-predicate.asciidoc

Matching "and" clauses are taken into account during <<search-dsl-predicate-common-score,score>> computation.

.Matching a document that matches all the multiple given predicates (~`AND` operator)
====
[source, JAVA, indent=0, subs="+callouts"]
----
include::{sourcedir}/org/hibernate/search/documentation/search/predicate/PredicateDslIT.java[tags=and]
----
<1> The hits *must* have a `title` field matching the text `robot`,
independently of other clauses in the same boolean predicate.
<2> The hits *must* have a `description` field matching the text `crime`,
independently of other clauses in the same boolean predicate.
<3> All returned hits will match *all* the clauses above:
they will have a `title` field matching the text `robot`
*and* they will have a `description` field matching the text `crime`.
====

[[search-dsl-predicate-and-lambda]]
=== Adding clauses dynamically with the lambda syntax

It is possible to define the `and` predicate inside a lambda expression.
This is especially useful when clauses need to be added dynamically to the `and` predicate,
for example based on user input.

> .Easily adding clauses dynamically using `.where(...)` and the lambda syntax

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.Easily adding clauses dynamically using `with(...)` and the lambda syntax
```

Until we address https://hibernate.atlassian.net/browse/HSEARCH-4676, this example will be relying on `.with`, not `.where(BiFunction)` (which was what I meant in the original title you copy/pasted and adapted).

====
[source, JAVA, indent=0, subs="+callouts"]
----
include::{sourcedir}/org/hibernate/search/documentation/search/predicate/PredicateDslIT.java[tags=and-dynamicParameters-root]
----
<1> Get a custom object holding the search parameters provided by the user through a web form, for example.
<2> Call `.where(Function)`.
The function, implemented by a lambda expression, will receive a predicate factory, use it to build an `and` predicate,
invoke the `with(Consumer)` method and return this predicate. The consumer, implemented by a lambda expression,
will receive a clause collector for the `and` predicate as an argument, and will add clauses to that collector as necessary.
<3> By default, a boolean predicate will match nothing if there is no clause.
To match every document when there is no clause, add an `and` clause that matches everything.
<4> Inside the lambda, the code is free to use any Java language constructs, such as `if` or `for`,
to control the addition of clauses.
In this case, we only add clauses if the relevant parameter was filled in by the user.
====

> Another syntax relying on the method `with(...)` can be useful when the boolean predicate is not the root predicate,
> see <<example-and-or-dynamicParameters-with,this example>>.
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

That's not "another" syntax, that's precisely the syntax described in the example above.

Matching `or` clauses are taken into account during <<search-dsl-predicate-common-score,score>> computation.

.Matching a document that matches any of multiple given predicates (~`OR` operator)
====
[source, JAVA, indent=0, subs="+callouts"]
----
include::{sourcedir}/org/hibernate/search/documentation/search/predicate/PredicateDslIT.java[tags=or]
----
<1> The hits *should* have a `title` field matching the text `robot`,
*or* they should match any other clause in the same boolean predicate.
<2> The hits *should* have a `description` field matching the text `investigation`,
*or* they should match any other clause in the same boolean predicate.
<3> All returned hits will match *at least one* of the clauses above:
they will have a `title` field matching the text `robot`
*or* they will have a `description` field matching the text `investigation`.
====

[[search-dsl-predicate-or-lambda]]
=== Adding clauses dynamically with the lambda syntax

It is possible to define the `or` predicate inside a lambda expression.
This is especially useful when clauses need to be added dynamically to the `or` predicate,
for example based on user input.

> .Easily adding clauses dynamically using `.where(...)` and the lambda syntax

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.Easily adding clauses dynamically using `with(...)` and the lambda syntax
```

This example will be relying on `.with`, not `.where(BiFunction)` (which was what I meant in the original title you copy/pasted and adapted).

====
[source, JAVA, indent=0, subs="+callouts"]
----
include::{sourcedir}/org/hibernate/search/documentation/search/predicate/PredicateDslIT.java[tags=or-dynamicParameters-root]
----
<1> Get a custom object holding the search parameters provided by the user through a web form, for example.0
<2> Call `.where(Function)`.
The function, implemented by a lambda expression, will receive a predicate factory, use it to build an `or` predicate,
invoke the `with(Consumer)` method and return this predicate. The consumer, implemented by a lambda expression,
will receive a clause collector for the `or` predicate as an argument, and will add clauses to that collector as necessary.
<3> Inside the lambda, the code is free to use any Java language constructs, such as `if` or `for`,
to control the addition of clauses.
In this case, we only add clauses if the relevant parameter was filled in by the user.
====

> Another syntax relying on the method `with(...)` can be useful when the boolean predicate is not the root predicate:
> 
> .[[example-and-or-dynamicParameters-with]]Easily adding clauses dynamically using `with(...)` and the lambda syntax
> ====
> [source, JAVA, indent=0, subs="+callouts"]
> ----
> include::{sourcedir}/org/hibernate/search/documentation/search/predicate/PredicateDslIT.java[tags=and-or-dynamicParameters-with]
> ----
> <1> Get a custom object holding the search parameters provided by the user through a web form, for example.
> <2> Call `.where(Function)` to create the root predicate, which is not the one we're interested in here.
> <3> Call `.or().with(Consumer)` to create an inner, non-root predicate.
> The consumer, implemented by a lambda expression, will receive a collector as an argument
> and will add clauses to that collector as necessary.
> <4> Inside the lambda, the code is free to use any Java language constructs, such as `if` or `for`,
> to control the addition of clauses.
> In this case, we add one clause per author filter.
> ====

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

That's not "another" syntax, that's precisely the syntax described in the example above.

[[search-dsl-predicate-or-other]]
=== Options

* The score of an `or` predicate is variable by default,
but can be <<search-dsl-predicate-common-constantScore,made constant with `.constantScore()`>>.
* The score of an `or` predicate can be <<search-dsl-predicate-common-boost,boosted>>
with a call to `.boost(...)`.

[[search-dsl-predicate-boolean]]

> == `bool`: advanced combinations of predicates (or/and/...)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
== [[_combining_queries]] `bool`: advanced combinations of predicates (or/and/...)
```

This is a pre-existing tag from Hibernate Search 5, we need to keep it to avoid dead links.

either on a per-field basis with a call to `.boost(...)` just after `.field(...)`/`.fields(...)`
or for the whole predicate with a call to `.boost(...)` after `.matchingAny(...)` or `.matchingAll(...)`.

[[search-dsl-predicate-and]]
// TODO YB: find references to _combining_queries and add references to _anding_queries

> == [[_anding_queries]] `and`: combine predicates as a conjunction

Reviewer: I'm not sure where this `_anding_queries` anchor comes from? Unless there was such a (generated) anchor in previous versions of the documentation, you don't need that.

Reviewer: > (Looks like section anchors are not much used either, but that's another discussion...)

They are useful when answering user questions and pointing to the documentation.

Author: Ah!  There's a link when we hover over titles!

> The `and` predicate matches documents that match a conjunction of inner predicates, called "clauses".
> `and` clauses are required to match: if they don't match, then the `and` predicate will not match.

Reviewer: WDYT of that? Seems more straightforward to me.

```suggestion
The `and` predicate matches documents that match **all** of its inner predicates, called "clauses".
```

Author: Perfect!

.Matching a document that matches all the multiple given predicates (~`AND` operator)
====
[source, JAVA, indent=0, subs="+callouts"]
----
include::{sourcedir}/org/hibernate/search/documentation/search/predicate/PredicateDslIT.java[tags=and]
----
<1> The hits *must* have a `title` field matching the text `robot`,
independently of other clauses in the same boolean predicate.
<2> The hits *must* have a `description` field matching the text `crime`,
independently of other clauses in the same boolean predicate.
<3> All returned hits will match *all* the clauses above:
they will have a `title` field matching the text `robot`
*and* they will have a `description` field matching the text `crime`.
====

[[search-dsl-predicate-and-other]]
=== Options

* The score of an `and` predicate is variable by default,
but can be <<search-dsl-predicate-common-constantScore,made constant with `.constantScore()`>>.
* The score of an `and` predicate can be <<search-dsl-predicate-common-boost,boosted>>
with a call to `.boost(...)`.

[[search-dsl-predicate-or]]
// TODO YB: find references to _combining_queries and add references to _oring_queries

> == [[_oring_queries]] `or`: combine predicates as a disjunction

Reviewer: Same comment about `_oring_queries`: where does that come from?

Author: Ditto!

> The `or` predicate matches documents that match at least one inner predicates, called "clauses".
> If none of the clauses match, then the `or` predicate will not match.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `or` predicate matches documents that match **any** of its inner predicates, called "clauses".
```

.Matching a document that matches any of multiple given predicates (~`OR` operator)
====
[source, JAVA, indent=0, subs="+callouts"]
----
include::{sourcedir}/org/hibernate/search/documentation/search/predicate/PredicateDslIT.java[tags=or]
----
<1> The hits *should* have a `title` field matching the text `robot`,
*or* they should match any other clause in the same boolean predicate.
<2> The hits *should* have a `description` field matching the text `investigation`,
*or* they should match any other clause in the same boolean predicate.
<3> All returned hits will match *at least one* of the clauses above:
they will have a `title` field matching the text `robot`
*or* they will have a `description` field matching the text `investigation`.
====

[[search-dsl-predicate-or-other]]
=== Options

* The score of an `or` predicate is variable by default,
but can be <<search-dsl-predicate-common-constantScore,made constant with `.constantScore()`>>.
* The score of an `or` predicate can be <<search-dsl-predicate-common-boost,boosted>>
with a call to `.boost(...)`.

[[search-dsl-predicate-boolean]]
== [[_combining_queries]] `bool`: advanced combinations of predicates (or/and/...)

> The `bool` predicate allows to combine inner predicates in a more complex fashion than with simpler

Reviewer: Grammar: it's either "allow <somebody> to -" or "allow -ing".
"allow to -" is incorrect.

```suggestion
The `bool` predicate allows combining inner predicates in a more complex fashion than with simpler
```

Author: Arf!  TIL that an infinitive complement shall only be used when a "noun phrase object (indicating the patient)" is specified, see e.g. https://english.stackexchange.com/questions/60271/grammatical-complements-for-allow/60285#60285.
Thanks for that lesson!

Reviewer: I just edited my comment, because `<somebody>` was being interpreted as HTML and removed, which made my comment completely nonsensical :)

> <<search-dsl-predicate-and,`and`>> and <<search-dsl-predicate-or,`or`>> predicates.

Reviewer: "and and or" feels weird :)

```suggestion
<<search-dsl-predicate-and,`and`>>/<<search-dsl-predicate-or,`or`>> predicates.
```

Author: :+1:

[[search-dsl-predicate-boolean-or]]
=== Emulating an `OR` operator

> A `bool` predicate with only `should` clauses and no `minimumShouldMatch` specification will behave as an `OR` operator.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A `bool` predicate with only `should` clauses and no <<search-dsl-predicate-boolean-minimumshouldmatch,`minimumShouldMatch` specification>> will behave as an `OR` operator.
```
